>> ON THIS EDITION FOR SUNDAY,
DECEMBER 8, PRESIDENT PRAISE
THE INTERIM DEAL AS U.N.
INSPECTORS VISIT A KEY SITE THAT
HAS BEEN OFFLIMITS FOR YEARS
>>> WE WILL LOOK AT HOW NELSON
MANDELA USED SPORTS TO TRANSFORM
SOUTH AFRICA
>>> AND PRINTING THEIR OWN
MONEY.
>> IT'S GOOD FOR OUR COUNTRY T
KEEP MANUFACTURING HERE.
IT IS ABOUT SHOPPING LOCAL
>> NEXT ON "PBS NEWS HOU
WEEKEND.
>>> GOOD EVENING
I'M ALISON STEWART
HARI SREENIVASAN
IS OFF
>>> LAST MONTH AMERICA'S LEADING
POWER STRUCK A DEAL WITH IRAN.
NOW THE FALL BETWEEN IRAN AN
THE WEST APPEARS TO BE
CONTINUING
TODAY FOR THE FIRST TIME I
YEARS IRAN ALLOWED INTERNATIONAL
INSPECTORS TO VISIT A KE
NUCLEAR SITE WHERE A REACTOR T
PRODUCE HEAVY WATER IS UNDER
CONSTRUCTION
HEAVY WATER CAN BE USED TO MAK
PLUTONIUM FOR A NUCLEAR WEAPON
IN A SPEECH TODAY IRANIA
PRESIDENT SOUGHT TO REAASSUR
HARD LINERS IN HIS COUNTRY THA
LAST MONTH'S DEAL IS ALREADY
BENEFITTING IRAN
>> Translator: CRUEL SANCTIONS
AGAINST THE ISLAMIC REPUBLIC HAS
CAUSED RECESSIONS IN THE
ECONOMY.
THE FIRST PHASE IN TALKS HAS LED
TO ECONOMIC SUCCESSES.
>> ISRAELI PRESIDENT WAS ASKED
IF HE WOULD BE WILLING TO MEET
WITH ROUHANI
>> WHY NOT
I DON'T HAVE ENEMIES
WE DON'T CONSIDER IRAN AS AN
ENEMY.
>> YESTERDAY PRESIDENT OBAMA
DOWN PLAYED EXPECTATIONS OF
BIGGER LONG-TERM DEAL WITH IRA
REGARDING ITS NUCLEAR PROGRA
BUT SAYS NEGOTIATIONS ARE WORT
THE EFFORT
>> WE HAVE TO NOT CONSTANTLY
ASSUME THAT IT'S NOT POSSIBL
FOR IRAN, LIKE ANY COUNTRY, TO
CHANGE OVER TIME
I WOULDN'T SAY IT IS MORE THAN
50/50 BUT WE HAVE TO TRY
>> NEIGHBORING IRAQ TODAY THER
WAS ANOTHER SERIES OF FATA
BOMBINGS
AUTHORITIES SAY AT LEAST 4
PEOPLE WERE KILLED AND DOZEN
WOUNDED AFTER A SERIES O
EXPLOSIONS
THE VIOLENCE IS WORSE THAN A
ANY TIME SINCE 2006 WHEN THE
COUNTRY WAS ON THE VERGE O
CIVIL WAR.
>>> IN UKRAINE TODAY PROTESTER
TOPPLES AND BEHEADED A STATU
PART OF A MUCH LARGERE
DEMONSTRATION.
THEY ARE DEMANDING THAT TH
GOVERNMENT MOVE AHEAD WITH A
DEAL TO DEEPEN TIES TO THE WEST.
THE PLAN ANGERED RUSSIA TO THE
EAST
>>> BACK IN THIS COUNTRY THE
HUGE STORM THAT CAUSED MAJOR
POWER OUTAGES IN TEXAS HAS MOVED
EASTWARD
A SPOKESWOMAN FOR EMERGENC
MANAGEMENT IN VIRGINIA WARNED OF
WHAT SHE CALLED A HISTORIC ICE
EVENT.
THE STORM SENT SNOW TO
PHILADELPHIA
A CATHOLIC HIGH SCHOOL
TEACHERS, AN OPENLY GAY MAN,
AFTER HE APPLIED FOR A NEW
JERSEY LICENSE TO WED HI
PARTNER.
>>> A DISTANT REMINDER OF WORL
WAR II
AN UNEXPLODED ONE-TON GERMAN
BOMB WAS UNCOVERED 20 FEET UNDER
THE GROUND AT A CONSTRUCTION
SITE IN SERBIA
IT WAS REMOVED FROM THE SCEN
AND DESTROYED.
>>> NOW RETURN TO IRAN WHERE
U.N. INSPECTORS VISITED A SITE
USED TO PRODUCE PLUTONIUM THAT
COULD BE USED IN A NUCLEAR
WEAPON
WE ARE JOINED IN WASHINGTON BY
DAVID ALBRIGHT
HE IS A LEADING EXPERT
THE INSPECTORS ARE VISITING
HEAVY WATER PRODUCTION PLANT
WHAT ARE THEY LOOKING FO
SPECIFICALLY AT THIS PLANT
>> THIS IS A VISIT BY TH
INSPECTORS
SO THEY ARE LOOKING FOR VERY
SIMPLE THINGS.
IS THE PLANT OPERATIONAL
HOW MUCH HEAVY WATER HAS I
MADE
THEY WILL TRY TO FIND OUT WHAT
ITS PURPOSE IS, I WOULD IMAGINE.
IRAN HAS SAID IT HAS MADE ENOUGH
HEAVY WATER FOR THE ADJACENT
HEAVY WATER PRODUCTION REACTOR
SO WHY DOES IT NEED TO OPERATE
THE HEAVY WATER PRODUCTION
PLANT?
IS IT GOING TO EXPORT IT
IS IT PLANNING TO BUILD MORE
HEAVY WATER REACTORS
THE PLANT IS PART OF THE TWO
FACILITIES INCLUDING THE
REACTORER THAT U.N. SECURITY
COUNCIL RESOLUTIONS HAVE ASKED
TO HAVE OPERATIONS SUSPENDED
WHAT THAT MEANS IS THAT THIS
PLANT IS ALSO ON THE LIST OF
PLANTS THAT THE UNITED STATES IS
LIKELY GOING TO WANT TO SEE SHUT
DOWN IF THERE IS A FINAL DEA
WITH IRAN.
AND THIS KIND OF VISIT CREATES A
BASELINE OF WHAT IS GOING ON
THERE AND IT WILL HELP ESTABLISH
WHERE THE PLANT IS NEEDED.
>> TODAY IS A ONE DAY EVENT AT
ONE PLACE.
ULTIMATELY, HOW MANY INSPECTIONS
WILL TAKE PLACE?
>> FOR THE AGENDA OF THE AGENC
THIS IS A SMALL, IMPORTANT STEP.
THEY WILL HAVE TO VISI
MILITARY-RELATED SITES RELATED
TO PAST AND ON GOING WORK.
THE SITE HAS A FACILITY THAT I
LINKED TO OLD WORK ON NUCLEA
WEAPONS.
AND IN THAT PERIOD OF DENIAL
IRAN HAS ESSENTIALLY REBUILT THE
SITE AND IT WILL MAKE THE JO
HARDERER TO VERIFY WHAT HAPPENED
THERE IN THE PAST.
AND THAT MEANS THEY WILL WANT TO
TALK TO PEOPLE AND GO TO OTHER
SITES THAT HAVE BEEN LINKED TO
NUCLEAR WEAPONIZATIO
ALLEGATIONS.
IT IS GOING TO BE A LONG
DIFFICULT PROCESS AND WILL
DEPEND ON IRAN COOPERATING WIT
THE INSPECTORS
>> WHAT IS THE LIKELIHOOD OF
IRAN CONCEALING THE NUCLEA
PROGRAM?
>> I DON'T THINK IT HAS DONE A
VERY GOOD JOB.
THE EVIDENCE ASSEMBLED FOR MAN
MEMBER STATES IS THEY HAD
NUCLEAR WEAPONS PROGRAM IN THE
PAST AND PARTS OF IT MAY HAV
CONTINUED.
THE PROBLEM IS IRAN ABSOLUTELY
DENIES IT, CALLS THE INFORMATION
FABRICATED, MISINTERPRETED AND
HAS TAKEN THE POSITION THEY HAVE
NEVER HAD A NUCLEAR WEAPON
PROGRAM.
I THINK THE EVIDENCE IS PRETTY
GOOD AND IRAN WILL HAVE TO
CHANGE ITS APPROACH AND START TO
ADDRESS THE CONCERN.
IT CAN DO IT IN SECRET
THIS DOESN'T HAVE TO BE A PUBLIC
DISCUSSION
THERE ARE MANY WAYS FOR IRAN TO,
IN A SENSE, COME CLEAN AND
ADDRESS THE CONCERNS
IT CAN'T ESCAPE IT
IT WILL ABSOLUTELY HAVE TO
ADDRESS THE CONCERNS
AND THE RECENT JOINT PLAN OF
ACTION NEGOTIATED REITERATES
THAT THE CONCERNS WILL HAVE TO
BE ADDRESSED IF THERE IS GOING
TO BE A FINAL DEAL
>> HOW MUCH IS TODAY'S
INSPECTION A GESTURE OR A TEST
OF IRAN'S COOPERATION GOIN
FORWARD?
>> I THINK IT IS A GOOD GESTUR
BY IRAN.
THEY HAVEN'T ALLOWED THE
INSPECTORS INTO THE PLANT SINC
THE VISIT BEFORET THAT WAS I
I THINK IT IS A GOOD GESTURE B
IRAN AND SETS UP WHAT YOU HAVE
TO LOOK AT AS A VERY DIFFICULT
PROCESS BUT A POSITIVE PROCESS
IN THAT IRAN APPEARS TO BE
WILLING TO OPEN UP
IT IS GOING TO BE SORELY TESTE
IN THE NEXT SEVERAL MONTHS
YOU HAVE TO VIEW TODAY'S SUCCESS
AS GIVING HOPE FOR THE FUTURE.
>> THANK YOU SO MUCH
>> THANK YOU
>>> IN SOUTH AFRICA TODAY TENS
OF THOUSANDS OF BLACK AND WHIT
SOUTH AFRICANS TOOK PART IN
NATIONAL DAY OF PRAYER AND
REFLECTION TO HONOR NELSON
MANDELA, THEIR FORMER PRESIDEN
AND ANTIAPARTHEID ACTIVIST WHO
DIED THURSDAY.
NELSON MANDELA UNDERSTOOD THAT
ONE OF THE NATION'S MOST POPULAR
SPORTS, RUGBY, COULD PLAY A BI
ROLE IN BRIDGING SOUTH AFRICA'
RACIAL DIVIDE.
>> RUGBY WAS ALSO DIVISIVE,
SYMBOL OF APARTHEID.
TO MANDELA IT WAS AN
OPPORTUNITY.
IT WAS JUST A YEAR INTO HI
PRESIDENCY
NO ONE EXPECTED HIM TO DON THE
GREEN AND GOLD OF THE JERSEY
JUST LISTEN TO THE REACTION OF
THE CROWD, A WHITE RUGBY CROWD
AND WHEN SOUTH AFRICA BEAT THE
COUNTRY CELEBRATED AS ONE.
THE VICTORY PARADE ROARE
UNPRECEDENTED UNITY.
>> THIS ACHIEVEMENT HAS UNITED
THE WHOLE NATION
AND WHAT HAPPENED IN WHICH MOR
THAN 100,000 PEOPL
PARTICIPATED
[ INAUDIBLE ] THIS EVENT HAS
UNITED THE ENTIRE COUNTRY.
>> Reporter: MANDELA'S
MANIPULATION OF SPORT TO BUILD A
NATION WAS THOUGH ACCIDENT
IN THE WEEK LEADING UP TO TH
SCENES KNOWING WHITE STILL
STEERED HIM THE COUNTRY'S FIRS
BLACK PRESIDENT FLEW TO THE TEAM
TRAINING CAMP AND MOMENTS BEFORE
THE FINAL HE WOULD VISIT THEM IN
THEIR DRESSING ROOM TO SAY GOO
LUCK
>> IT IS EXCITING.
STANDING INSIDE AND PHOTOGRAPH
WITH THE PRESIDENT
WE RESPECT HIM AS A GREA
LEADER
TOMORROW WE KNOW ONE GUY IN TH
STAND TO PLAY FOR AND THAT I
THE PRESIDENT.
>> BEFORE THEY WENT TO THE FIELD
I WENT TO THEIR DRESSING ROO
AND I TOLD THEM THAT THE WHOLE
COUNTRY WAS BEHIND THEM AND THEY
MUST GO TO THE FIELD FULLY
MOTIVATED KNOWING THAT THEY WILL
BRING GLORY TO SOUTH AFRICA.
>> Reporter: IN THOSE HEAVY FE
DAYS SO MUCH CHANGED
SPORTS FOR MANDELA DID SOMETHING
NOTHING ELSE COULD, AND HE KNE
IT
>>> WITH SO MUCH OF WHAT WE BU
NOW MANUFACTURED OVERSEAS, MAN
AMERICANS ARE TRYING TO FIND
WAYS TO SUPPORT THE U.S. ECONOMY
BY BUYING AMERICAN-MADE GOODS.
SOME ARE TAKING IT A STE
FURTHERER.
IN MASSACHUSETTS AS DISCOVERED
LAST SUMMER PEOPLE ARE TRYING TO
BOOST LOCAL BUSINESSES BY USIN
LOCAL CURRENCY
THIS SEGMENT ORIGINALLY AIRED IN
SEPTEMBER.
>> Reporter: THE BERKSHIRE
MOUNTAINS OF WESTERN
MASSACHUSETTS HOME TO TH
HISTORIC INN OPERATING SINCE
1773 BACK WHEN THE TAB MIGHT
HAVE BEEN SETTLED WITH
CONTINENTALS, REVOLUTIONAR
CURRENCY
240 YEARS LATER I CAN PAY BY
UNITED STATES DOLLAR, OF COURSE,
OR CREDIT CARD
>> WHAT IS MY BILL
>> RIGHT NOW YOU HAVE AN
OUTSTANDING BALANCE OF $148.10
>> Reporter: THE INN OFFER
ANOTHER OPTION
I'M GOING TO GET SHARES TO PAY
WITH
BURKE SHARES, AN ALTERNATIVE
LOCAL CURRENCY BORN IN 2006 AN
NOW ACCEPTED BY SOME 400
BUSINESSES
THE PROCESS BEGINS AT FIVE ARE
BANKS.
AMONG THEM THE BANKS HAVE ABOU
A MILLION IN THEIR VAULT
CIRCULATED WHEN SOMEONE LIKE M
STEPS UP TO THE WINDOW
CAN I TRADE DOLLARS FOR BERK
SHARES HERE?
NO FUSS, NO MUSS AND YOU BUY
THEM AT A FIVE PERCENT DISCOUN
GETTING 105 BERK SHARES FO
EVERY $100
FOR MY $700 TO COVER OUR CRE
COSTS FOR SEVERAL NIGHTS AT TH
INN, 735 BERKSHARES.
AND YOU GET A DISCOUNT AT EVER
PLACE THAT ACCEPTS THE LOCAL
CURRENCY BECAUSE AT THE BANK I
TAKES 105 BERKSHARES TO BU
BACK $100.
>> IT IS A WAY TO KEEP MONEY
WITHIN THE COMMUNITY
>> Reporter: BRIAN BUTTERWORTH
IS THE RED LION INN'S DIRECTOR
OF SALES
>> WE DON'T MAKE MONEY OR LOSE
ANYTHING
>> Reporter: I GOT A 5
DISCOUNT
THAT IS NOT GOOD FOR THE INN
>> WE SPEND THEM AS U.S. DOLLARS
AND IT STAYS IN OUR COMMUNIT
BECAUSE THERE IS A GEOGRAPHI
LIMIT TO WHERE YOU CAN USE THEM.
>> Reporter: THE LIMIT IS ABOU
TEN MILES OUTSIDE OF THE COUNT
BORDERS.
ALICE RUNS THE PROGRAM OUT O
THE CENTER
SHE ADMITS SMALL CAN ALSO BE
PAROCHIAL.
>> YOU CAN SEE LOCAL CURRENCY AS
ISOLATIONIST
>> Reporter: PROTECTIONIST
SHE HARDLY SEES IT REPRESENTS
THREAT TO GLOBAL TRADE
>> WE USED TO HAVE LOCAL
CURRENCIES EVERYWHERE.
THAT IS WHAT WE WOULD LIKE T
SEE AGAIN IS REGIONAL CURRENCIES
THAT WORK FOR THEIR REGION AND
THEN A NATIONAL CURRENCY
>> Reporter: IN A REMARKABLE APT
APPLICATION OF THE PHRASE -- I
FRANCE [ SPEAKING FOREIG
LANGUAGE ] WHILE THINKIN
GLOBALLY WE WERE ACTING LOCALL
AND MORE INTERESTED IN THE
CURRENCY OF BERKSHIRE COUNTY
FIRST STOP THE MAGIC FLUTE,
LOCAL UKULELE MANUFACTURER
>> WE TOOK THE TREES DOWN AN
KILN DRY THE WOOD.
>> Reporter: CO-OWNER A WOMA
SOME MIGHT DESCRIBE AS FROM AN
EARLIER ERA.
>> WE HAVE BEEN ABLE TO FIND
WOOD
AND IN OUR NEW VIOLIN WE USE A
INJECTION MOLDER HERE.
>> Reporter: THE MAGIC FLUTE
PAYS IN BERK SHARES FOR TH
PARTS TO MAKE THE INSTRUMENTS.
>> WE SELL ALL OVER THE WORL
BUT HIRE LOCAL PEOPLE.
IT IS GOOD FOR OUR COUNTRY T
KEEP MANUFACTURING HERE.
IT'S ABOUT COMMUNITY, SUPPORT,
SHOPPING LOCAL
IT'S ABOUT SUSTAINABILITY WHER
WE LIVE AND WORK
>> Reporter: THE BERKSHIRES AR
KNOWN FOR A CERTAIN LIFESTYL
WHICH ATTRACTS COSMOPOLITA
LOCALS
>> IT TOOK ME TEN YEARS TO MOV
HERE FULL TIME
>> Reporter: A NATIVE OF THE
SOUTH OF FRANCE USED TO BE A
FASHION EDITOR, NOW RUNS HIS OWN
GOURMET SHOP
>> WE TAKE BERK SHARES FROM OU
CUSTOMERS WHEN THEY PURCHASE
FOOD OR ITEMS OFF THE SHELF.
AND WE ALSO PAY SOME OF THEM
LOCALLY WITH BERKSHARES.
>> Reporter: IS IT MORE
POLITICAL ACT OR SELF-INTEREST
ACT IN THE SENSE THAT YOU GE
MORE BUSINESS IF THERE ARE MOR
PEOPLE CIRCULATING OR OWNING
BERKSHARES
>> IT IS A BIT OF BOTH
WE TRY TO OPERATE LOCA
INDUSTRIES AND PUT A STOP TO BIG
STORES COMING IN AND NOT HAVIN
THE SAME EFFECT WHEN THEY DO
BUSINESS HERE AS A SMALLER
ENTERPRISE WOULD
IN THAT SENSE IT IS POLITICAL.
>> Reporter: I ASSUME YOU MEAN
LIBERAL POLITICAL OR LEFT WING
IS THAT FAIR
>> YES IT IS FAIR.
LEFT WING, MAYBE
LIBERAL, YES
>> Reporter: SO IT WEN
EVERYWHERE WE VISITED AT
ESTABLISHMENTS DOING BUSINES
WITH BERKSHARES SINCE DAY ON
AND WITH RECENT CONVERT THAT
ALICE WAS JUST SIGNING UP.
>> I SIGNED UP FOR BERKSHARE
TODAY.
I THINK IT IS A BEAUTIFUL THING.
>> Reporter: A LIBERAL DREAM
COME TRUE?
THIS ISN'T PARTISAN SAYS BRIAN
BUTTERWORTH, A REPUBLICAN.
>> ALSO A CONSERVATIVE APPEA
BECAUSE OF SOME CONCERNS WIT
THE MONEY SYSTEM AS IT IS RIGH
NOW IN THE UNITED STATES
>> ANYTHING MADE LOCALLY
>> LOCAL NEW ENGLAND LOCAL BUT
NOT IN BERKSHIRE COUNTY.
>> Reporter: MOST OF THE TOYS HE
SHOWED ME FOR MY GRAND KIDS WERE
MADE IN CHINA.
BUT HE SEES HIMSELF AS DOING HIS
PART TO SAVE MAIN STREET FOR
TOURISTS AND LOCALS ALIKE.
IS BERKSHARES THE ANSWER TO TH
THREAT FOR RETAIL FROM THE
INTERNET AND CHAIN STORES?
>> I WOULD SAY IT IS PART OF THE
ANSWER
THE ANSWER IS ALSO TO CREATE
AWARENESS AMONG PEOPLE THAT IF
THEY SHOP ONLINE 100% OF WHA
THEY SPEND GOES INTO THE SAM
CYBER SPACE THAT THEY AR
SENDING THEIR ORDER.
IF THEY SHOP AT A BIG BOX STOR
65% OF WHAT THEY SPEND LEAVE
THE COMMUNITY.
>> Reporter: IN THE END DO
CONSUMERS REALLY CARE?
LEGEND HAS IT THE VERY FIRST
BERKESHARE TRANSACTION TOO
PLACE ACROSS THIS COUNTER.
>> I WENT THROUGH KIND OF
SHALLOW TIME
>> Reporter: AND ALICE I
WORKING HARD TO ADD EVEN MOR
BUSINESSES, DESIGNING A SCHEME
TO ISSUE MORE BERK SHARES AS
SO-CALLED PRODUCTIVE LOANS T
LOCAL BUSINESSES BY FRONTING
THEM THE CURRENCY TO STARTUP O
EXPAND
SHE ALSO HOPES TO UNTIE BERK
SHARES FROM THE U.S. DOLLAR.
>> OUR GOAL IS TO CREATE A
CURRENCY THAT HOLDS ITS VALUE AS
OPPOSED TO A CURRENCY LIKE THE
DOLLAR THAT IS INFLATING
CONSTANTLY
AT THAT POINT PEOPLE WILL WANT
TO USE BERKSHARES.
>> Reporter: AND FOR FOLKS I
PLACES LIKE BERKSHIRE COUNTY THE
HOPE IS THAT HERE COMES THE SU
ONCE MORE.
♪♪
>>> PAUL SOLOMON TALKS WIT
SMALL BUSINESS OWNERS ABOUT BERK
SHARES
>>> ON THE NEWS HOUR TOMORROW ON
AIR AND ONLINE SITS DOWN WIT
CARLOS SANTANA
THAT IS IT FOR THIS EDITION OF
"PBS NEWS HOUR WEEKEND".
I'M ALISON STEWART
THANKS FOR WATCHING.